ANNUAL
REPORT

2021

STRENGTHENING WOMEN’S ABILITY FOR
PRODUCTIVE NEW OPPORTUNITIES (SWAPNO)

ANNUAL
REPORT
2021
STRENGTHENING WOMEN’S ABILITY FOR
PRODUCTIVE NEW OPPORTUNITIES (SWAPNO)

ANNUAL REPORT 2021
Strengthening Women’s Ability for Productive New Opportunities
(SWAPNO) project

Report writing Team
Mizanur Rahman, M&E Oﬃcer, SWAPNO, UNDP
Kashﬁa Sharmin, National Consultant - Research & Communication, SWAPNO, UNDP
Hossain Ishrak, IT & MIS Support Oﬃcer, SWAPNO, UNDP

Editorial Board
Sarah Amena Khan, Team Lead, UNDP Bangladesh Research Facility
Kajal Chatterjee, National Project Manager, SWAPNO, UNDP
Habibur Rahman, Joint Secretary, LGD and National Project Director, SWAPNO
Copyright © UNDP Bangladesh
All rights reserved
Strengthening Women’s Ability for Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

Design & Printing
Tithy Printing & Packaging
28/C-1 Toyenbee Circular Road, Motijheel C/A, Dhaka-1000.

Minister

Ministry of Local Government,
Rural Development and Co-operatives

MESSAGE
Under the visionary and dynamic leadership of Hon'ble Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina Bangladesh has
made outstanding development in numerous socio-economic indicators over the recent years.
Government of Bangladesh has given immense eﬀort on ﬁnancial inclusion of the rural women by
reducing gender gaps and gender-based discriminations. Ministry of Local Government, Rural
Development and Cooperatives is also working at the grass root level to achieve the national goals by
eradicating poverty.
The project Strengthening Women’s Ability for Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO) has
provided various forms of opportunities like access to regular income through the local
government's public works programme, microenterprise and business development through
livelihood skills development training, job placement through RMG and leather sectors. Linkages are
created with local SMEs for vocational apprenticeship training and subsequent job placement in the
formal sector.
I would like to express my heartiest gratitude to the development partners UNDP, Swedish Embassy
in Dhaka and Marico Bangladesh for their invaluable and ongoing assistance in fostering an enabling
environment for rural women living in poverty.
Joy Bangla
Joy Bangabandhu

Md. Tazul Islam, MP
Minister
Ministry of Local Government,
Rural Development and Co-operatives

Senior Secretary

Local Government Division
Ministry of Local Government,
Rural Development and Co-operatives

MESSAGE
Poverty reduction and creating enabling environment for women’s advancement is one of the top
priorities of the Bangladesh Government, which is reﬂected in the 8th Five Year Plan and Vision
2021-2041. Strengthening Women’s Ability for Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO) is one of the
best poverty graduation programmes, which is dedicatedly implemented to reach out to the
women-headed hard core poor families. Even in the unforeseen emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic,
SWAPNO has been able to eﬀectively support its beneﬁciaries through income mobility and adaptive
livelihoods to prevent slippage into the poverty trap.
I am delighted to see that the Local Government Division and UNDP Bangladesh have been working
eﬀectively since 2015 to make SWAPNO as a success by bringing in international donors, private sector
actors and the local government. The 2021 Annual Report entails important interventions made in
2021, which can be replicated in the poverty stricken and climate vulnerable districts of Bangladesh.
In line with the Government’s National Social Security Strategy (NSSS) of the present government, the
project leverages public works to train vulnerable women in vocational skills, places them in productive
employment and supports them to move out of poverty. SWAPNO has eﬀectively contributed to
Bangladesh’s national and global commitments. On the national level, it promotes an inclusive and
equal opportunity workforce, including increasing women’s labor force participation. On the global
level, the project reﬂects Bangladesh’s commitments to eradicating extreme poverty as part of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Hence, SWAPNO’s graduation model has been recognized as a
promising model for eliminating poverty in National Social Security Conference 2019.
The project has acted as a profound platform that served the expectations of both parties – Local
Government and vulnerable rural women which ultimately contributes to reducing poverty and
achieving gender equality. Therefore, nationwide replication of the project interventions could further
accelerate Government’s commitment to eliminate extreme poverty by 2031.
I would like to express my appreciation to the National Project Director, UNDP Bangladesh, and the
entire SWAPNO team for their dedication and hard work. I would like to thank the Swedish Embassy in
Dhaka and Marico Bangladesh, who have continued to be generous and trustworthy partners in
assisting us in reducing poverty and ensuring that our country's economic progress remains equitable,
just and long-lasting.
Joy Bangla
Long live Bangladesh
Helal Uddin Ahmed

Senior Secretary
Local Government Division
Ministry of Local Government,
Rural Development and Co-operatives

Joint Secretary

Local Government Division &
National Project Director, SWAPNO

MESSAGE
I am pleased to present the Annual Progress Report 2021 of Strengthening Women’s Ability for Productive
New Opportunities (SWAPNO) project. This is a gender-based social security project targeting ultra-poor
rural women who are widowed, divorced, abandoned, or left with a disabled husband. The project aims to
uplift these women out of extreme poverty through productive and sustainable livelihoods. Under the
auspices of National Social Security Strategy (NSSS) of the Bangladesh government, SWAPNO is
implemented jointly by Local Government Division and UNDP since 2015.
In 2021, the project has successfully implemented the interventions started in 2020 and initiated new
activities for ensuring a sustained impact on beneﬁciaries’ livelihoods. SWAPNO’s strong partnership with
RMG and Leather sectors helped to place 800 women in formal sector jobs (200 in Readymade Garments
and 600 in the Leather sector). So far, 588 women have been placed in factories such as EcoFab Ltd, Green
Smart Shirt Ltd, FB footwear, Runner footwear, MK footwear, Royal footwear, Shoes BD, and others.
Beneﬁciaries have also obtained apprenticeship training in various trades and have worked in local SMEs.
On a pilot basis, SWAPNO has implemented two types of micro health insurance policies in association with
Green Delta Insurance and Micro-Fintech in Jamalpur- SWAPNO Surokkha Policy and SWAPNO Shathi
Policy. The project partnered with UNCDF and Eco-Social Development Foundation (ESDF) to establish a
milk chilling plant in Kurigram District. With the support of UNCDF and Eco-Social Development Foundation
(ESDF), the beneﬁciaries of the cooperatives purchased 8 decimals of land for establishing the plant. The
construction work is under process and expected to be fully operational within April 2022.
This year, SWAPNO has taken an initiative to establish a water treatment plant for the beneﬁciaries and
community people of Fulchari Upazila, Gaibandha District where underground water is contaminated by
Iron and Arsenic. Once operational, it is projected that roughly 600 households including 150 households
from the Ashrayan project, will have access to clean drinking water. Water supply is expected to begin by
January 2022. One of the signiﬁcant interventions of this year is the development of climate-resilient
homesteads for 198 beneﬁciaries, particularly raising plinths of homesteads in low-lying char areas. It is
implemented in Lalmonirhat, Gaibandha and Jamalpur districts to enable the beneﬁciaries to combat
shocks induced by ﬂash ﬂoods.
I would like to thank our valued partners - UNDP, Swedish Embassy in Dhaka, and MARICO Bangladesh - for
their unwavering support in helping LGD implement the project. I pay my sincere gratitude to the
concerned district administrations, my project team, UP representatives, and the partner NGOs for
outstanding performance and achievements. I am looking forward to seeing another successful year in
2022.

Habibur Rahman

Joint Secretary
Local Government Division &
National Project Director, SWAPNO

CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1

1. INTRODUCTION

5

1.1 Background
1.2 Project Approach
1.3 Contribution to Sustainable Development Goals
1.4 Project Area

2. SUMMARY OF PROJECT ACTIVITIES
2.1 Public Asset Maintenance
2.2 Savings Mechanism
2.3 Income Generating Activities (IGA)
2.4 Livelihood Skills Development & Formal Sector Employment
2.5 Household Micro Business
2.6 Enterprise Development & Local Employment
2.7 New Initiatives
2.8 Gender equality & Women Empowerment
2.9 Health & Nutrition
2.10 Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR)
2.11 Financial Inclusion
2.12 M&E and MIS
2.13 Visibility & Communication
2.14 Project Stakeholders Meetings & Visits

7
8
9
10

11
13
14
14
15
16
18
21
23
24
25
26
27
30

3. Challenges & Lessons Learned

35

ANNEX

38

i) Success Story
ii) Financial Cost Statement

38
40

ACRONYMS
BCC
COVID-19
DFS
G2P
GPS
IEC
IGA
LDC
LGD
MCP
MoWCA
ROSCA
SDG
UDMC
UNCDF
UNDP
WTP

Behavior Change Communication
Coronavirus disease
Digital Financial Service
Government to Person
Global Positioning System
Information, Education & Communication
Income Generating Activity
Least Developed Country
Local Government Division
Master Craft Person
Ministry of Women & Children Aﬀairs
Rotating Savings & Credit Association
Sustainable Development Goal
Union Disaster Management Committee
United Nations Capital Development Fund
United Nations Development Programme
Water Treatment Plant

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
SWAPNO (Strengthening Women's Ability
for Productive New Opportunities) is a
gender-based social security project that
aims to lift poverty-stricken rural women
out of economic insecurity by providing
them with productive and sustainable
livelihood opportunities. Since its inception
in 2015, SWAPNO has demonstrated that
social protection's responsibility should not
be conﬁned to only giving relief; it can
provide a path for the underprivileged to
more sustainable and equitable economic
and social development.
The 2021 Annual Progress Report describes
the results of planned interventions for the
3rd (SWAPNO-II) cycle. Experiencing
success during previous cycles in Satkhira
and Kurigram, the project expanded its
activities in 3 new districts—Lalmonirhat,
Jamalpur and Gaibandha—in 2020. In 2021
rapid transmission of COVID-19 had an
adverse impact on planned activities of the
project. Countrywide lockdown delayed
formal sector employment initiatives
initially as most of the apparel and leather
factories were closed. Moreover, ﬂooding
in the northern districts wreaked havoc on
people's livelihoods. The project engaged
the District Managers, NGO workers
(Project Coordinator, Project Oﬃcers and
Union Workers), maintained close
coordination with the district and
sub-district administration and the UP
representatives for ensuring smooth
implementation of the activities. Project
donors (Swedish Embassy in Dhaka
and
Marico) visited the project areas and
supported the beneﬁciaries by providing
cash grants and hygiene kits. 6182

beneﬁciaries received cash grant of BDT
2000 and hygiene kits were received by
9000 beneﬁciaries which helped them to
combat ﬁnancial and health risks posed by
the pandemic. Considering the pandemic,
the Government decided to extend the
project duration from January 2022 – June
2022 by following no-cost extension
modality.

Major Accomplishments:
As per Annual Work Plan (AWP), the project
made signiﬁcant progress in year 2021
which are linked with Monitoring and
Evaluation (M&E) Plan indicators. A
snapshot of the accomplishments is given
below:
•

Public asset maintenance: Public asset
maintenance
programme,
which
started in 2020, oﬃcially completed the
15 months tenure in 2021. The
beneﬁciaries repaired and maintained
5,986 public works schemes in 2021.
These schemes are broadly categorized
in three groups: Earthen Road
maintenance – 4363 schemes (73%),
ﬁeld raising of educational and religious
institutions—1466 schemes (23%),
Herringbone Road Maintenance—140
schemes (3%) and others (1%). Through
public asset maintenance activities,
around 468405 people from across 99
Union Parishads got better access to
local markets, Union Parishads, and
Upazila Parishads.

• Savings: ROSCA-pulled savings, forced
savings and ﬁstful rice collection - these
three-savings mechanism facilitated

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 1

SWAPNO beneﬁciaries to generate USD 2.43
million. The beneﬁciaries have invested this
amount in several income earning activities
such as grocery shops, small business,
livestock rearing, collective agro-farming and
buying and selling points.
• Income Generating Activities (IGAs):
Beneﬁciaries in Jamalpur, Gaibandha and
Lalmonirhat have completed the employment
tenure in April 2021. Yet all have been running
income generating activities (IGAs). On
average, at least 3 types of IGAs are being
operated by each beneﬁciary. The most
preferred IGAs are – Goat/Sheep rearing,
Poultry/Duck rearing, Cow rearing and small
business.
• Formal sector employment: Apart from
informal livelihoods, SWAPNO lifts distressed
women out of poverty by ensuring their
access to formal sector employment in
readymade garments (RMG) and leather
sectors. After successful completion of the
training, a total of 588 women got
employment in the formal sector (398 women
in RMG industry and 190 women in Leather
industry). 400 more beneﬁciaries are in queue
to access training and employment. Since
these women had to settle in a new
community, the project provided mentoring
and counseling support as well. SWAPNO also
conducted a series of meetings and training
for the employers to ensure a decent
workplace environment. A hotline number
was also given to the employees so that they
can contact the project oﬃce in case of any
kind of abuse or insecurity.
• Household micro business: Apart from
ensuring ﬁnancial stability, SWAPNO initiated
several
climate-adaptive
household
micro-business interventions to make the
rural women more climate-resilient and
economically independent. As part of this
initiative, beneﬁciaries are producing
vegetables using sack cultivation method,
producing fodder for the cattle using
hydroponic technology, vermicompost as
chemical free fertilizer, and operating buying
and selling points.

2 I

• Enterprise
development
&
local
employment: SWAPNO has undertaken
initiatives such as low-cost sanitary napkin
production, mask production, establishment
of a mini garments, Milk chilling plant, Water
treatment plant and mini hatcheries for the
beneﬁciaries. In Kurigram District, women
beneﬁciaries produced 48,050 packets of
sanitary napkin, worth BDT 2,40,2500 (USD
28264.71). Furthermore, 164 beneﬁciaries
have produced 13,520 face masks this year
and earned around BDT 270000 (USD 3182)
by selling the masks in their localities. The
project established ‘Shunipun Mini-garments’
at Kaliganj upazila of Satkhira district which
started operation from January 2021. So far,
this garments have sold their products i.e
Panjabi, apron, palajjo, masks, etc. in the local
markets worth BDT 17,86,277 (USD 21015).
To establish a milk chilling plant in Kurigram,
the project partnered with UNCDF and
Eco-Social Development Foundation (ESDF)
and purchased 8 decimals of land worth BDT
6,50,000 (USD 7661). The milk chilling plant is
currently being established. SWAPNO
mobilized its beneﬁciaries in Gaibandha to
form a Cooperative for establishing a Water
Treatment Plant (WTP) in Gazaria in
collaboration
with
Fulchari
Upazilla
Administration of Gaibandha. The project also
facilitated three women entrepreneurs’
groups in Jamalpur District to establish three
chicken hatcheries for strengthening the
native chicken value chain.
• New initiatives: This year, the project has
implemented several new initiatives that
proved to be quite eﬀective. To ensure the
best price for the livestock, SWAPNO piloted
an online model to connecting its
beneﬁciaries with the urban market titled
‘SWAPNO online Qurbani Haat.’ The project
partnered
with
Parmeeda.com
and
Anondomela that facilitated selling the
livestock of project beneﬁciaries during Eid-ul
Adha 2021. In response to the Government's
COVID-19 Vaccination Campaign, the project
assisted beneﬁciaries to register online using
the Government owned SUROKKHA App and
linked with the Upazila/Union health service

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

providers to take the vaccine smoothly.
SWAPNO developed a Communication toolkit
on Leather sector workplace in collaboration
with the Leathergoods and Footwear
Manufacturers & Exporters Association of
Bangladesh (LFMEAB). The project organized
trade-based apprenticeship training for the
selected beneﬁciaries. A total of 258 women
have ﬁnished the training and are now
working in various trades in their community.
• Gender equality: SWAPNO observed
International Women’s Day 2021 in all project
areas. The project has celebrated the 16 Days
of activism by hosting a live Webinar.
Representatives from the public and private
sectors like LGD, UNDP, Swedish Embassy in
Dhaka, Brac attended the session, discussed
regarding the current state of violence against
women in Bangladesh, and suggested ways to
address the issue. The project also organized
psycho-social counseling sessions for the
beneﬁciaries employed in the formal sector,
the trained women got clear understanding
on the formal sector environment.
• Health & nutrition: The project piloted two
micro health insurance policies as SWAPNO
Surokkha Policy and SWAPNO Shathi Policy in
association with Green Delta Insurance and
Micro-Fintech. The insurance has covered
1587 women beneﬁciaries of 5 Upazilas of
Jamalpur district. To enhance awareness on
nutrition, the project conducted 483
courtyard awareness sessions and 297
cooking demonstrations in Jamalpur,
Lalmonirhat and Gaibandha districts.
• Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR): Union
Disaster Management Committees (UDMCs)
are supposed to play a vital role in reducing
disaster risks at the local level. SWAPNO
trained 5,472 Union Disaster Management
Committee (UDMC) members from 171
Unions on Gender-responsive Disaster Risk
Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation
strategies. They are capacitated to support
the
local
communities
to
adapt
climate-resilient practices and technologies.
Development of climate-resilient homesteads

particularly raising plinths of homesteads in
low-lying char areas is one of the signiﬁcant
interventions of SWAPNO. In close
consultation with the local communities and
UPs, a total of 198 beneﬁciary households
from Jamalpur, Gaibandha and Lalmonirhat
were given cash support to raise their
homestead.
• Financial Inclusion: The project partnered
with Nagad (Digital ﬁnancial service of
Bangladesh Post Oﬃce) and enabled all
beneﬁciaries to perform their ﬁnancial
transactions using the Mobile/Digital Financial
Services (MFS/DFS) system. The project
interventions
improved
beneﬁciaries’
knowledge of digital ﬁnancial transactions.
According to the project’s endline DFS study,
beneﬁciaries can conduct transactions
independently, which is two times higher than
that of the baseline situation.
• M&E and MIS – This year, for evaluating the
eﬀectiveness of project interventions,
SWAPNO commissioned BIDS to conduct End
line evaluation. It has also conducted GPS
mapping to track the buying-selling points and
vermicompost centers of the beneﬁciaries.

Key results of End-line Evaluation 2021:
The project conducted a third-party evaluation in
year 2021. Bangladesh Institute of Development
Studies (BIDS) has conducted this evaluation and
below are the major ﬁndings:
1. SWAPNO’s intervention enhanced the
livelihood of rural women in poverty and
disaster-prone districts of Bangladesh,
empowered them, and reduced inequality
towards sustainable and inclusive economic
growth. Signiﬁcant improvement in the
savings and income level was observed in
beneﬁciary households. Income of the
beneﬁciaries is almost six times higher
compared to the base situation in 2019.
Monthly average expenditure is almost three
times higher (BDT 9827 or USD 115.6)
compared to the base situation (BDT 2901 or
USD 34).

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 3

2. The rural women who received SWAPNO’s
various training are now more vocal when
approaching UP and local service providers.
3,564 women have taken life skills and
livelihood skills training which helped them to
enhance their capacity to engage in diﬀerent
income-generating activities.
3. The digital ﬁnancial system of SWAPNO
project ensured access to ﬁnancial institutions
for 100% of its 3564 most vulnerable, rural
female-headed households.
4. The productive asset value of beneﬁciary
households increased signiﬁcantly in
comparison with the control group. The

current average productive asset value of
beneﬁciary households is BDT 35344 (USD
416) and the control group is BDT 10485 (USD
123).
5. The beneﬁts of the project are noticeable not
only in terms of major economic indicators
but also reﬂected in terms of dietary diversity
and ‘subjective measures’ of well-being.
Among the beneﬁciary households, 53% have
median or above dietary diversity which is
31% for the control households. Around 20%
of the beneﬁciary households reported about
food surplus while only 4.82% of the control
households mentioned about it.

Introduction

1. Introduction
1.1 Background
Bangladesh’s economic growth rate during the
past decade has established a steady growth
pattern in our development trajectory. Once
known as one of the world’s ten poorest countries,
Bangladesh has now risen to becoming the world’s
41st largest economy and has outperformed other
South Asian countries across various social
indicators. It ranked 65 out of 156 nations in the
Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI) of the World
Economic Forum's Global Gender Gap Report
2021. Per capita income has increased to USD 2554
in 2021 as compared to USD 1314 in 2015.
Despite Bangladesh's remarkable economic
success, violence against women continues to be
widespread and unabated. Women and girls of all
ages are vulnerable to abuse, harassment, and
assault in their homes, schools, workplaces, and
public spaces. The unprecedented global COVID-19
pandemic struck strong in March 2020 and has
worsened the situation, creating a ‘shadow
pandemic’ of increased violence against women.
The horriﬁc consequences of the pandemic
continued in 2021; aﬀected the social, political,
and economic sectors. All of the economic
activities were suspended after announcing the
lockdown. Informal workers were forced to
migrate to their rural homes because of their job
loss. International trade orders in RMG industries
were cancelled. Formally recognized workers were
under the constant threat of being downgraded to
informal worker status. Due to sudden disruption
in textile and garments manufacturing industries,
trades and business of diﬀerent sectors,
agricultural production, and the unemployment of
a considerable number of people, the economy of
the country was under a severe threat. Situation
worsened with the price hikes of daily
commodities; resulted in food insecurity in

Bangladesh. Rural households were forced
to reduce their food consumption and
received government food assistance as
well as private sector monetary
assistance.
Environmental hazards are also impacting
livelihoods of marginalized groups.
Bangladesh is constantly exposed to
ecological shocks such as ﬂooding, storms,
sea-level rise owing to climate change.
The southwest and coastal districts are
particularly aﬀected by such shocks.
Cyclone Amphan in 2020 drove more than
2.4 million people to ﬂee their homes and
eventually become climate refugees. In
August 2021, heavy rainfall caused
ﬂooding in northern Bangladesh.
Kurigram, Lalmonirhat, Tangail, Rajbari
were among the worst-aﬀected districts,
according to the National Disaster
Response Coordination Centre. According
to government ﬁgures, more than 40,000
households were aﬀected, 7759 hectares
of agricultural land were damaged, and
more than 200 homes were destroyed.
These complex factors are aﬀecting growth
and development progress, creating large
regional disparities in Bangladesh. Within
this context, women are disproportionately
vulnerable to these challenges, as they
exacerbate existing inequalities, such as
poor labor force participation, lack of
ﬁnancial inclusion, discriminatory legal
framework, gender-based violence, or lack
of political participation.
Considering the above-mentioned factors,
the Local Government Division of

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 7

1.2 Project Approach
SWAPNO is a poverty-reduction program
based on public works and social
transfers. It targets ultra-poor rural
women who are widowed, divorced,
abandoned, or left with a disabled
husband. SWAPNO has gathered insights
into how women can slip back into
poverty owing to malnutrition, climate
vulnerability, gender-based violence, and
other factors since its inception.
SWAPNO’s intervention is based on a
"state-of-the-art" graduation approach
that incorporates livelihood promotion,
ﬁnancial inclusion, social protection, and
social empowerment. For 15 months, the
women
are
employed
by
the
government. Simultaneously, participants
receive training in self-conﬁdence,
leadership, ﬁnancial literacy, basic
numeracy, saving, and spending.
Following these, they receive livelihood
training based on their interests and local
market opportunities in order to start
micro-businesses
or
ﬁnd
formal
employment. They can access capital to
invest in their businesses after completing
their employment term.
Bangladesh and UNDP spearheaded a
gender-responsive project called “Strengthening
Women’s Ability for Productive New
Opportunities (SWAPNO)” in 2015 to uplift
underprivileged rural women out of poverty. In
response to the pandemic, the project
implemented various innovative initiatives which
facilitated the rural women combating the
economic stagnancy.
SWAPNO supports Bangladesh to accomplish its
national and international commitments: it
fosters an inclusive and equal opportunity
workforce on a national basis and helps expand
women's labor force participation. On a global
scale, the project demonstrates Bangladesh's
commitment to the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) of alleviating extreme poverty.

8 I

From the following picture, it is evident
that SWAPNO’s Graduation approach
empowers rural women through four
components –
1.

Productive Social Capital: SWAPNO
supports women with productive
social capital through credit and
savings augmentation, network
facilitation, and livelihood skills
development training.

2.

Self-worth: SWAPNO broadens the
mindset of rural women by
providing training on several topics
like
Leadership
development,
Decision-making,
Conﬁdence
building, etc.
Human Capital: Life skills trainings on
Gender, Rights & Entitlement, Health
& Nutrition, Disaster Risk Reduction

3.

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

4.

transform and empower rural women to
become ‘Human Capital’.
Financial Inclusion: SWAPNO’s Financial literacy
training, access to formal ﬁnancial institutes,
digital payment mechanism contributes
eﬀectively to bring this underserved
demographic under the 'Financial Inclusion'
umbrella.

1.3 Contribution to
Sustainable
Development Goals
Adopted by the United Nations and member
countries in 2015, the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDG), aims to end poverty, protect the
planet, and ensure peace and prosperity by 2030.
As a United Nation member state, Bangladesh has
also committed to the SDGs and prioritized on
investing in human development.
As a social safety net project, SWAPNO
contributes to following areas of inclusive
development –
● poverty alleviation,
● future employability,
● gender equality
● access to healthcare system
● climate resilience
● linkage development
partnership

Figure 1: SWAPNO Approach

through

eﬀective

These are aligned with the following SDGs

Figure 2: SDG goals

The project contributes to localizing the SDGs as it
is being implemented in Bangladesh's
poverty-stricken and climate-vulnerable districts.
SWAPNO's social cash transfer mechanism, as well

as entrepreneurship, vocational training, and
productive employment opportunities are
contributing towards Bangladesh’s aim to attain
the above goals by 2030.

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 9

1.4 Project Area
SWAPNO supports impoverished women living in
poverty-induced and climate-vulnerable locations
to graduate out of poverty, as previously stated.
The districts are – Kurigram, Satkhira, Lalmonirhat,

Jamalpur and Gaibandha districts in 2020.
In 2021, the project enabled 3564 women to
successfully graduate from poverty. In order to

Kurigram
9 Upazilas,
72 Unions;
5184 Beneficiaries
Graduated (in two cycles)

Lalmonirhat
4 Upazilas,
37 Unions;
1332 Beneficiaries

Jamalpur
05 Upazilas,
45 Unions;
1620 Beneficiaries

Gaibandha
2 Upazilas,
17 Unions;
612 Beneficiaries

Satkhira
5 Upazilas,
52 Unions;
3744 Beneficiaries garduated
(in two cycles)

Figure 3: Project areas

Jamalpur and Gaibandha. These districts were
selected based on the poverty map of Bangladesh
(BBS), and the project identiﬁed beneﬁciaries
through a rigorous selection process.
From 2015 to 2019, the project was implemented
in Satkhira and Kurigram districts and supported
8928 women to graduate from poverty. Based on
success, the project was expanded in Lalmonirhat,

10 I

strengthen the ability of the graduated women in
Satkhira and Kurigram, the project assisted to
develop business cooperatives, establish several
proﬁtable enterprises and access to the online
market place.

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

SUMMARY OF
PROJECT RESULTS
& ACTIVITIES

2. SUMMARY OF PROJECT ACTIVITIES
2.1 Public asset maintenance
Public asset maintenance programmes are implemented by the government or aid agencies to create
short-term employment to increase income, reduce poverty gap and develop infrastructure. By
embedding the most successful features of global public works programmes with a broader
development approach, SWAPNO has designed a new form of Public works programme to achieve the
following objectives:
1. Eﬀectively addressing chronic poverty for the most vulnerable populations
2. Enabling socially protective participation by women without compromising other critical
responsibilities and development opportunities
3. Creating sustainable, high-quality pro-poor
assets
In April 2021, SWAPNO completed this program.
The beneﬁciaries worked in 5986 public works
schemes in 99 unions which were identiﬁed by the
community members along with the Union
Parishad (UP) representatives at the grassroots
(ward) level meetings. The schemes are broadly
categorized in three groups: Earthen Road
maintenance-4363
Schemes
(73%),
Field
raising-1466 schemes (23%), Herringbone Road
Maintenance-140 schemes (3%) and others (1%).
The project also facilitated tree plantation in a
couple of unions. For example, the project
beneﬁciaries planted 1500 Basak trees in Fulbari
Upazila, Kurigram. Beneﬁciaries also conducted
roadside plantation in 1.5 Kilometers in Singimari
Union under Hatibandha Upazila, Lalmonirhat.

Total Number

5986

of Public Works
Earthen Rood
Maintenance
4363

Field Raising

1466

Hemingbone Rood
Maintenance

140

Tree Plantation

17

Figure 4: Public asset maintenance

Through this intervention, every beneﬁciary has received BDT 150 as daily wage and BDT 50 as
mandatory savings which they received after the employment period. They invested this amount in
several income-generating activities like cattle farming, small business, vegetable cultivation, poultry
rearing and tailoring, etc.
Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 13

2.2 Savings mechanism
One of SWAPNO’s notable interventions is to
instill savings habit among beneﬁciaries through
forced savings, Rotating Savings and Credit
Association (ROSCA) and ﬁstful rice collection.
From 15 months forced savings, beneﬁciaries
have generated BDT 18000 (USD 209). ROSCA
oﬀers a “commitment device”: the pressure to
put money aside regularly helps women to save,
which might have been diﬃcult for many in the
face of many competing spending demands. By
Individual
Forced
Savings
generated
USD 209

the end of employment tenure, the total ROSCA
savings of 3564 beneﬁciaries stood at BDT
18700000 (BDT 217074). Through ﬁstful rice
collection method, each beneﬁciary saves a
handful of rice in a pot before cooking. After a
fortnight, group members weight their rice and
sell those in the market. So far, beneﬁciaries have
collected 57.05 metric tons of rice worth BDT
2238,970 (USD 25990).

ROSCA
generated
USD 217,074
(cumulative)

Fistful rice
generated
USD 25990

Figure 5: Savings scenario

2.3 Income Generating Activities (IGA)

No. of IGAs

ROSCA lotteries and own
savings
enabled
the
IGA PREFERENCE
beneﬁciaries to invest in
income earning activities. In the
4000
3116
reporting year, beneﬁciaries
2659
3000
are conducting around 7000
2000
1962
2000
IGAs (each beneﬁciary operates
766
at least 3 IGAs) but their most
1000
preferred ﬁve IGAs were –
0
Goat/Sheep rearing (3116),
Goat/Sheep
Poultry/Duck
Crop
Cow
Small
Poultry/Duck rearing (2659),
rearing
rearing
Cultivation
rearing
Business
Crop cultivation (2000), Cow
Name of IGAs
rearing (1962) and small
Figure 6: IGA preference
business (766). Beneﬁciaries
graduated this year are successfully running these IGAs without project support. Since the beneﬁciaries
are conﬁdent to run IGAs independently, many of them are undertaking bigger initiatives like:
Buying-selling point, participating in Digital Qurbani Haat for selling cattleheads, Chicken hatchery, and
Group farming.

14 I

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

2.4 Livelihood skills development & formal
sector employment
Livelihood skills development
SWAPNO lifts distressed women out of
poverty by ensuring their access to both
formal and informal income opportunities.
For informal incomes, the project conducted
demand-driven livelihood skills development
training on four topics – poultry and bird
farming, cow rearing and beef fattening, goat
and sheep farming and small business
management along with a mandatory kitchen
garden training. In the previous section, it is
clearly stated that the project has eﬀectively
Figure 7: Livelihood Training
mobilized the beneﬁciaries to run their IGAs
and livelihood skills training has enhanced their capacities to do this.

Formal sector employment
Apart from the informal sector,
SWAPNO supported beneﬁciaries to get
jobs in formal sectors. SWAPNO has
developed cost-sharing partnerships
with export-oriented green factories
such as Ecofab Ltd, Green Smart Shirt
Ltd and skills providing organizations
like the Centre of Excellence for Leather
Skills of Bangladesh (COEL) to transfer
industrial skills and placement in jobs
after
assessing
their
learning.
SWAPNO’s strong partnership with
these factories helped to place 800
Figure 8: Formal sector employment
women in formal sector jobs (200 in
readymade garments and 600 in the leather sector). so far, job placement was done for 588 women
in several RMG and Leather factories. After job placement, SWAPNO conducts post job counseling
sessions to know about the working experiences of the beneﬁciaries.

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 15

2.5 Household micro business
SWAPNO initiated several climate-adaptive household micro business initiatives to make rural women
more climate-resilient. Some of the interventions are as follows:

• Vermicompost production
Vermicompost is the product of the
decomposition process using various species
of worms, usually red wigglers, white worms,
and other earthworms, to create a mixture of
decomposing vegetable or food waste,
bedding materials, and vermicast. This process
is called vermicomposting. To increase the use
of this organic fertilizer, The project has
selected 100 beneﬁciaries who have cattle
farms and trained them on vermicompost
production. Annually they produce around
53.36 metric ton compost. Beneﬁciaries use
this in their homestead plants and sell the rest
of the fertilizer to the local markets. Market
value is BDT 640320 (USD 7533.18). Selling of
this organic fertilizer helps them to invest in
their family necessities.

• Sack cultivation
SACK cultivation refers to the production of
crops in soil-ﬁlled sacks or polythene bags,
containers, or plastics. The sack method
allows a free ﬂow of water to the roots and
retains moisture more eﬃciently than
traditional methods, meaning sack farmers
can keep their plants hydrated with less water.
In this regard, SWAPNO initiated SACK
cultivation for its beneﬁciaries. Total 7253
beneﬁciaries are currently applying this
method of vegetable cultivation. Each of the

16 I

beneﬁciary have 8-10 sacks at present. They
utilize the produced vegetables in two
ways-by consuming half of the vegetables and
selling rest of the vegetables in the local
market. They can now ensure the intake of
nutritious food for their families.

• Low-cost hydroponic technology
In Kurigram, most of the beneﬁciaries are
involved in cattle rearing. But they often face
diﬃculties in collecting fodder. The cost of
fodder is getting high in the market and
sometimes becomes unavailable. Farmers
face the fodder crisis from August-November.
During the crisis period, the price of fodder
gets high and rises to BDT 20 per kg. To help
these beneﬁciaries with climate-resilient and
low-cost fodder production, the project
introduced low-cost Hydroponic technology.
Beneﬁciaries installed hydroponic sets by the
locally available materials like bamboo, plastic
tray, PVC pipe etc. and produced fodder. After
producing fodder, beneﬁciaries feed their
cattle and noticed signiﬁcant changes. Their
cows are getting healthier. They are now
growing 30-40 kg fodder in a month. After
assessing success in Kurigram, the project
extended this technology in 3 districts –
Jamalpur, Lalmonirhat and Gaibandha. Total
40 beneﬁciaries from these districts were

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

trained and given support to install hydroponic
sets at their homestead.

•

Most of the shops are located near the Union
parishad. Local people, farmers buy their
required items from the shops. The
beneﬁciaries started the business with an
average initial investment of BDT 20000. This
initiative facilitates the beneﬁciaries to
generate BDT 8000 – 1000. Community people
are also satisﬁed as they can get their desired
amount at a reasonable price. They don’t need
to go to Upazila for buying these items. As
credit facility is available, poor people can
aﬀord the items easily.

Buying-Selling point - In Bangladesh, access

to agricultural inputs is crucial to the
development of the agriculture and food
security sector. However, lack of availability of
quality inputs in the right place, at the right
time and in small packs is one of the main
reasons for low level of production. In this
context, SWAPNO initiated the establishment
of agricultural input buying-selling points for
its beneﬁciaries. A total of 171 (Kurigram –72,
Jamalpur – 45, Lalmonirhat – 37, and
Gaibandha – 17) small shops have been
earmarked as buying-selling points.

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 17

2.6 Enterprise development & local employment

The onset of COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020 exacerbated existing gender inequalities and
pushed millions of people into extreme poverty. To combat the economic stagnancy of the
beneﬁciaries, SWAPNO established two Cooperatives – SWAPNO Nari Kollyan Samitee and
Kollyani Nari Kollyan Samitee; these were registered by the Department of Cooperatives. This
year, the project has started establishing two business enterprises — a Milk chilling plant and a
Water treatment plant to instill an entrepreneurial mindset in the beneﬁciaries. The details have
been described below:

Kollyani sanitary napkin

Mask production

Last year, SWAPNO beneﬁciaries from Kurigram
came forward with an idea to produce low-cost
sanitary napkins for rural women and adolescent
girls forming a Cooperative named ‘Kallayani Nari
Kallayan Samittee’. The cooperative has trained
and recruited 5 beneﬁciaries in each union of
Kurigram who are working as sales agents. They
took the lead to produce low-cost sanitary pads
aiming to oﬀer aﬀordable health hygiene
solutions for the poor and create employment
across the production and supply chain. There is
a separate “Menstrual Hygiene management
committee,” responsible for mass awareness on
sanitary napkins. About 50 community
volunteers work with the community people to
raise awareness on menstrual hygiene and the
necessity of using the sanitary pad. Till now, they
have sold 48,050 packets worth BDT 2402500
(USD 28264.71).

In association with MoWCA district and upazila
oﬃces, SWAPNO mobilized and supported 164
beneﬁciaries to establish ‘SWAPNO Nari Kollyan
Samitee’ and produce fabric masks. This year,
they have produced and sold 13520 masks worth
BDT 3182.

18 I

Shunipun mini-garments
In 2020, SWAPNO established ‘Shunipun
Mini-garments’ in Kaliganj upazila, Satkhira and
oﬃcially started operations in January 2021.
Currently, around 25 employees including
SWAPNO women are working in this garments.
So far, they sold products i.e Panjabi, apron,
palajjo, masks, etc. in the local markets worth
BDT 1786277 (USD 21015).

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

Milk chilling plant
As part of SWAPNO’s “Promoting Gender
Responsive Enterprise Through Dairy Value Chain
Activities”, the project partnered with UNCDF
and Eco-Social Development Foundation (ESDF)
to establish a milk chilling plant in Fulbari Upazila,
Kurigram. Fulbari has emerged as a potential
Dairy hub. But dairy farmers face challenges in
collecting and preserving milk due to lack of
chilling plants, market access and lack of
processing facilities. They also don’t get a fair
price for milk. SWAPNO facilitated ESDF and
SWAPNO Nari Kallyan Cooperative to approach
UNCDF for establishing milk processing plant
where UNCDF mobilized the credit facilities from
scheduled bank. Through the joint partnership,
beneﬁciaries of the cooperative purchased 8
decimals of land and the milk chilling plant is
currently being established. It is expected that
100 SWAPNO beneﬁciaries and people in nearby
communities involved in cow rearing will direct
beneﬁt from this milk chilling plant.

Water Treatment Plant (WTP)
Generally, people in Gaibandha privately extract
water from a depth of 35 to 50 feet of ground
level for drinking purposes. This drinking water is
contaminated by Iron and Arsenic, both of which
are hazardous for human health. The
contamination is relatively higher in Gazaria and
Kanchipara Unions of Gaibandha. In this regard,
SWAPNO mobilized its beneﬁciaries in Gaibandha
to form a cooperative for establishing a Water
Treatment Plant (WTP) in Gazaria in collaboration
with Fulchari Upazilla Administration of

Gaibandha. Fulchari Upazilla Administration
allocated two spots in the two unions
(Kanchipara and Gazaria) to establish the WTP.
Members of this Cooperative are now working as
Waterpreneurs (Water Entrepreneurs) to ensure
safe drinking water for the local communities.
The capacity of the WTP is 8000 liter per day. The
cooperative operates the WTP, distributes water
to the community and sells surplus production as
bottled water to the local market. Around 300
households and about 100 commercial entities
buy this water with a minimum charge from the
cooperative.

Chicken hatchery
With active cooperation from SWAPNO project,
beneﬁciaries of Jamalpur district have established
460 vertical mini poultry ﬁrms to rear a native
variety of chickens on a pilot basis. They collect
native chicks locally, raise three to six months for
eggs production and sell live chicken in the
market. Each beneﬁciary earns around BDT 8000
– 10000 per month. Availability of native breed
chicks is one of the major problems of the
beneﬁciaries. SWAPNO mobilized three women
entrepreneurs’ groups to establish three chicken
hatcheries to supply the chicks and strengthen
the native chicken value chain in Jamalpur
District.

Figure 10: Chicken Hatchery
Figure 9: Water Treatment Plant

Group farming

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 19

One of the innovative features of SWAPNO
project is to capitalize the group approach in all
aspects of the poverty graduation journey.
SWAPNO introduced the Group farming concept
through mobilizing women groups and well-oﬀ
people of the community simultaneously and
establishing a commercial relationship to
transform the landless women into commercial
farmers. About 110 women under 14 groups
started group farming in Kurigram, Lalmonirhat
and Jamalpur districts. Each beneﬁciary was
supported with BDT 2000 to buy vegetable seeds,
fertilizer, and land preparation costs. By
producing and selling vegetables, they have
earned BDT 2,58,000 (USD 3035.29) so far.

Figure 11: Group Farming

2.7 New Initiatives
SWAPNO’s strong partnership with the government and private sectors not only facilitated in accessing
formal sector employment and creating innovative enterprises. It also supported its beneﬁciaries by
initiating inspiring interventions like Digital Qurbani Haat, COVID-19 Vaccination, etc.

1. Digital qurbani haat - To ensure the best price for the beneﬁciaries’ livestock, SWAPNO piloted

an online model of connecting its beneﬁciaries with the urban market titled ‘SWAPNO online Qurbani
Haat.’ The project partnered with Parmeeda.com, an organic food selling organization, and
Anondomela that facilitated selling the livestock during Eid-ul Adha 2021. Parmeeda collected
Livestock information from SWAPNO and created a separate database of the list on their website.

Figure 12: Online Qurbani Haat

139 cows and 173 goats were sold out of 340 animals. Through this initiative, beneﬁciaries got
opportunities to talk directly with buyers and settled the real price of their cattle and goats through
negotiation. Customers were satisﬁed with the overall service. They received 100% organic cattle and
goats at the doorstep of their houses.

2. COVID-19 vaccination - In response to

the Government's COVID-19 Vaccination
Campaign, SWAPNO raised awareness
among beneﬁciaries on the beneﬁts of
vaccination.
The
project
assisted
beneﬁciaries to register online using the
Government owned SUROKKHA App,
created easy access to get the registration
cards and ﬁnally linked with the
Upazila/Union health service providers to
take the vaccine smoothly.
Figure 13: Beneﬁciaries receiving COVID-19 vaccine

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 21

3.

Decent workplace environment
toolkit- The project partnered with Leather

goods and Footwear Manufacturing &
Exporter Association of Bangladesh (LFMEAB)
and developed ‘Decent workplace Toolkit’.
This is one of the unique initiatives of
SWAPNO. Based on the toolkit, the project
conducted a workshop where business leaders
and senior managers, representatives from
BGMEA, Bangladesh Employers Federation
were present

Figure 14: Workshop on Decent workplace
environment toolkit

4. Apprenticeship training - The project organized trade-based apprenticeship training for women

over 32 years old with the goal of becoming self-employed this year. For this, a total of 98 Master
Craft Persons (MCPs) were assigned to ensure learner engagement, perform hands-on practices, and
assess each learner at the end of each session. A total of 258 project participants have ﬁnished the
training and are now working in various trades in their community.

Figure 15: Apprenticeship Training

22 I

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

2.8 Gender equality & women empowerment

As mentioned earlier, SWAPNO is centered around distressed women’s enablement. So,
achieving Gender equality is the core mandate of SWAPNO and this year the project has
implemented several activities which has contributed to ensuring women empowerment in rural
areas.

International Women’s Day (IWD) 2021
"Women in Leadership: Achieving an Equal
Future in a COVID -19 World," was the theme
of International Women's Day (IWD) this year.
SWAPNO Head Oﬃce marked the occasion by
highlighting women's accomplishments in
terms of equality, empowerment, and
leadership. SWAPNO's National Project
Manager, Kajal Chatterjee, described the
issues SWAPNO recipients faced during
COVID-19 pandemic. He praised the
contribution of SWAPNO women. In presence
of the Upazila administration, ﬁeld oﬃces
commemorated the occasion by donning
purple masks provided by the Head oﬃce.

Psycho-social counseling session for
formal fector beneficiaries:
The
project
organized
psycho-social
counselling sessions for the beneﬁciaries
employed in the formal sector to understand
the formal sector environment. The Gender
and Social development specialist (GSS) of
SWAPNO project conducted a day-long session
following
COVID-19
safety
measures.
Workplace environment, Physical and Sexual
Harassment at work and in society, Personal
Health and Hygiene, and other topics were
discussed in the psycho-social counseling
session.

16 Days of activism
“Orange the World: End Violence Against Women Now!” was the theme of this year's 16 Days of
Activism. This year, SWAPNO hosted a Webinar on “Role of Poverty graduation programs in
tackling Violence against Women & Girls” to commemorate the campaign. Representatives from
the public and private sectors like LGD, UNDP, Swedish Embassy in Dhaka, Brac, etc. attended the
session. They discussed regarding the current state of violence against women in Bangladesh and
oﬀered suggestions for how to address the issue.

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 23

2.9 Health & nutrition
SWAPNO’s unique initiatives facilitate its beneﬁciaries to ensure their physical and mental well-being.
This year, SWAPNO conducted following initiatives to secure the health and nutrition related basic
services for the beneﬁciaries:

• Nutrition campaign – Due to lack of
awareness regarding the food nutrients, rural
women process and cook foods in a wrong
way which make them the victims of nutrition
deﬁciency. In this regard, SWAPNO has
conducted 483 courtyard awareness sessions
in Jamalpur, Lalmonirhat and Gaibandha
districts where 3564 women beneﬁciaries and
3289 neighboring women participated.
Moreover, 297 cooking demonstration were
organized to raise mass awareness among the
Figure: 15 Courtyard awareness sessions on Nutrition
community people. As a result of these
awareness development activities, around 9000 community people received knowledge on nutrition
issues.

• Micro-health insurance – This initiative was undertaken last
year in association with Green Delta Insurance and
Micro-Fintech on a pilot basis. The insurance has covered 1587
women beneﬁciaries of 5 upazilas of Jamalpur district. Two
types of insurance policies have been developed - SWAPNO
Surokkha Policy and SWAPNO Shathi Policy. This has provided
the beneﬁciaries with the ﬁnancial support needed when costs
are incurred from hospitalization or in-house treatment.
Without this ﬁnancial support, poor beneﬁciaries would have
been left with treatment from quack doctors in the
neighborhood.

Figure 16: Micro health Insurance

• Hygiene kits distribution – With the
support from Marico Bangladesh Ltd,
hygiene kits including soap bars, hand
sanitizers and Vaseline were distributed
among the beneﬁciaries. Around 9,000
beneﬁciaries and community people
received those hygiene kits. SWAPNO
ensured household use of the kit to
withstand COVID-19 infection.
Figure 17: Beneﬁciaries reveive hygiene kits
from Marico

24 I

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

2.10 Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR)
The project strengthened the capacities of Union Disaster Management Committees in project areas to
create a mass awareness on DRR and conducted plinth raising activities of the households of the
beneﬁciaries.

• UDMC training - Union
Disaster
Management
Committees (UDMCs) are
supposed to play a vital role
in reducing disaster risks at
the local level. It was
observed that the UDMC
members do not have
adequate knowledge on
disaster risk reduction &
climate change adaptation
strategies
and
limited
understanding on roles and
responsibilities
as
per
Standing Order on Disasters
(SOD).
Strengthening the
local institutional capacity is
one of the core outcomes of
the SWAPNO project to
reduce
vulnerability
of
distressed
women
and
available services for the
community. SWAPNO trained

Figure 18: UDMC Training

5472
Union
Disaster
Management
Committee
(UDMC) members from 171
Unions on Gender-responsive
Disaster Risk Reduction and
Climate Change Adaptation
strategies. It provided an
understanding of gender roles
that need to be included in all
aspects of disaster risk

• Plinth raising - The development of
raising plinths of homesteads in
signiﬁcant interventions of
the local communities and
selected from Jamalpur,
districts to provide partial
homestead. The selected
and completed the task
protect those houses
also allows household
vegetable cultivation and
the homestead.

reduction activities. The members
can now provide support to local
communities to adapt resilient
technology and coordinate with
development partners and service
providing
departments
to
implement the action plan for risk
reduction.

climate-resilient homesteads particularly
low-lying char areas is one of the
SWAPNO. In close consultation with
UPs, a total of 198 beneﬁciaries are
Gaibandha and Lalmonirhat
support
to
raise
their
beneﬁciaries worked in a group
in rotation. The raised plinth will
from inundation by the ﬂood. It
members to opt for year-round
rearing livestock and poultry in

Figure 19: Beneﬁciary raising plinth of homestead

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 25

2.11
Financial
Inclusion
Key
comparison
with Baseline
using MFS
sevices
1
beneﬁciaries
can cash out by
her own 2 times
higher

2
received other
ﬁnancial services
42 times higher

xxx

3

remembers PIN
code 2 times
higher

4
understanding/
how to operate and
check the account
balance by 2.5 times
higher

26 I

SWAPNO operates within the
national framework of social safety
net delivery system in line with the
ﬁnancial inclusion initiatives. Since
the inception, the project has
collaborated with multiple digital
ﬁnancial service providers like
Rocket, bKash, etc. to provide G2P
services among its beneﬁciaries. In
2021, the project partnered with
Nagad
and
capacitated
all
beneﬁciaries to perform their
ﬁnancial
transactions
using
Mobile/Digital Financial Services
(MFS/DFS) system.
In 2020, SWAPNO conducted a
baseline survey on ﬁnancial
inclusion of communities. In 2021,
the project conducted an endline
study with the same communities
following similar methodology. The
studies aimed at accumulating
baseline and end line study
information with diﬀerent aspects
of ﬁnancial inclusion, behavioural
impact, savings habit, and user
experiences with mobile ﬁnancial
service (MFS) providers. Systematic

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

online applications were used
for real-time data collection for
both the studies.
At the end of the end line study,
a
comparative
and
evidence-based analysis was
drawn in-between baseline and
end line survey. The project
intervention
improved
beneﬁciaries’ knowledge on
digital ﬁnancial transaction.
Presently, beneﬁciaries can
transact on their own and this is
two times higher than that of
the
baseline
situation.
Moreover, knowledge of mobile
wallets operating i.e checking
the balance, use of PIN code etc.
is presently 2.5 times higher
among the beneﬁciaries than
the baseline.

2.12 M&E and MIS
M&E and MIS are both
integral parts of
SWAPNO project
which act as tools for
operational
decision-making at
field and central
levels. Through an
online and offline
progress tracker, the
project monitors
activities, collects
information
periodically and
generates reports.
This year, SWAPNO
has commissioned
BIDS to conduct
Endline evaluation of
project’s 3rd cycle to
assess project’s
performance
compared to its
baseline status.
SWAPNO has
published DFS report
to assess digital
inclusion and updated
beneficiaries’
socio-economic profile
on a regular basis.

Reporting & documentation:
The
project
maintained
progress tracker for generati
ng project progress reports. The
project developed Quarterly
and Annual progress reports
and shared with UNDP, Sida and
Marico.

Field monitoring visit:
The project eﬀectively engaged
district and Upazila level GoB
oﬃcials and local government
representatives to monitor
project activities. During this
reporting period, 66 visits were
made to project areas by
district and Upazila level GoB
oﬃcials. Mr. Salehin Tanvir Gazi,
Director,
Sector-3,
Implementation,
Monitoring
and Evaluation Division (IMED),
visited
Lalmonirhat
and
observed the ongoing project
activities.
Partner NGO staﬀ and UNDP
district colleagues also paid
regular visits to identify
challenges and successes. The
project oﬃce also conducted
several virtual meetings (Zoom
meetings) with district teams,
beneﬁciaries,
and
UP
representatives to monitor
implementation status and
provided feedback to overcome
challenges.

MIS data collection:
SWAPNO collects updated
information by using online

platform. This online-real time
data
collection
platform
includes
updated
socio-economic proﬁle of
beneﬁciaries,
IGA
status,
progress of life skills and
livelihood
skills
training,
beneﬁciary
capacity
development and all ongoing
activities implemented in the
ﬁeld. SWAPNO has also
conducted GPS mapping to
track the buying-selling points
and vermicompost centers of
the beneﬁciaries.

End line evaluation:

Highlights
• Household income
increased by
almost Six times.
• Productive asset
value of
beneficiary
households is
more than Three
times higher
• 53% households
have median or
above dietary
diversity which is
31% for
non-beneficiary
households.

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 27

SWAPNO has conducted an endline evaluation of
3rd cycle women beneﬁciaries through
Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies
(BIDS) at the end of Year 2021. The main objective
of this study was to assess the impact of the
project beneﬁciaries’ wellbeing, including income,
expenditure and asset accumulation through
rigorous methods of project evaluation. The other
likely eﬀects of the project on employment, health
status, nutrition, food security, education,
aspiration (subjective well-being), women’s
empowerment and COVID-19 coping strategies
are also captured. Below are the major ﬁndings of
this evaluation:

•

Household

income

household’s
monthly
average
expenditure is almost three times higher
(BDT 9827 or USD 115.6) compared to
the base situation of (BDT 2901 or USD
34) in 2019.

•

Productive assets value increased:
The average productive asset value
increased
among
the
women
beneﬁciary
and
control
group
households. The BIDS evaluation
revealed that the productive asset value
of beneﬁciary households increased
dramatically compared with the control
group. The graph represents the current
average productive asset value of
beneﬁciary household which is BDT
35344 (USD 416) and the control group
is BDT 10485 (USD 123). This analysis
indicates
that
the
beneﬁciary
household’s productive asset value is
more than three times higher than the
control group.

increased:

Household income of SWAPNO
beneﬁciaries have increased over the
time, the income of beneﬁciary
households is now almost six times
higher compared to the base situation in
2019. Even in 2021, the income of
beneﬁciary households stood nearabout
double than that of control group. The
graph represents the average monthly
household income of beneﬁciary and
control groups.
Household monthly income in BDT
Compare with base & endline evaluation
14782

15k
12.5k
10k

8385

Figure 20: HH Productive asset value status

7.5k

•

5k

2.5k
0

2721

3027

Beneficiary
base (2019)

Control base
(2019)

Beneficiary end
(2021)

Control end
(2021)

Figure 19: HH Monthly Income Status

•

Household expenditure & savings
increased: SWAPNO beneﬁciary

households’ expenditure and savings
increased
through
the
project
intervention. Presently, the beneﬁciary

28 I

Dietary diversity increased:
The beneﬁts from the SWAPNO project
are not just noticeable in terms of major
economic indicators but also reﬂected in
terms of dietary diversity and
“subjective measures” of well-being.
Among the beneﬁciary households, 53%
percent have median or above dietary
diversity, which is around 31% for the
control
households
indicating
signiﬁcantly higher dietary diversity for
SWAPNO
beneﬁciary
households.

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

Around 20% of the beneﬁciary
households reported about food surplus
while only 4.82% of the control
households mentioned that they had
surplus food in their house. We observed
that, the prevalence of underweight
children is comparatively lower among
SWAPNO beneﬁciary group (2.23% as
against 5.15%) than the children from
control households.

•

Women mobility & decisionmaking power increased:
Increase
of
income/earnings,
expenditure, savings and assets
accumulation of SWAPNO beneﬁciaries’
gives
them
self-conﬁdence
and
self-esteem. More than 90% of SWAPNO
beneﬁciaries
are
decision-makers,
participate in social institutions, and are
sole bread earners, and they have
complete control over their assets and
income.

The graph shows a comparative analysis of
SWAPNO beneﬁciaries and the control
households. Almost all SWAPNO beneﬁciaries can
easily move to Union level as per their needs or to
get diﬀerent services. A signiﬁcant diﬀerence is
observed in between the beneﬁciary and control
group women to move at Upazila and District
level. Mobility of project women to Upazila level is
17% higher than that of control group women.
Similar trend also observed at District level
mobility which indicates a positive trend of project
beneﬁciaries to get access to diﬀerent services.

Figure 21: Women mobility status

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 29

2.13 Visibility & communication
To showcase project’s success, various forms of IEC materials such as video documentaries,
storybook, posters, print media publication, etc. were developed this year. Description of
the IEC materials is given below:
Print media
In 2021, SWAPNO interventions
are widely highlighted in print
media. News of interventions like
Fistful rice collection is published
in a leading newspaper. Daily Kaler
Kontho, Daily Sangbad and
Parliament News published a
Feature report on SWAPNO.
Project’s response on COVID-19 in
year 2020 was highlighted in
UNDP’s Asia Paciﬁc Newsletter in
June 2021 edition. UNDP has
published an online Photo-story
where
they
emphasized
SWAPNO’s journey. News of
Swedish mission visit to SWAPNO
project is published on both
Bangla and English dailies like
Daily Star, Dhaka Tribune,
Financial Express, Kaler Kontho,
etc. Basak tree plantation, one of
the signiﬁcant activities of the
project, got huge response from

Figure 22: SWAPNO in print media

the media. Daily Samakal
published an article describing
how this activity beneﬁtted the
beneﬁciaries as well as the
local community. Somoy TV

aired a documentary on this
initiative. UNDP Bangladesh
also published a web story on
their website.

Video documentary
A
video
documentary
titled
“Awakening of Life II” was published
on SWAPNO’s journey and innovative
interventions that the project has
taken so far. The project has
successfully
established
a
mini-garments titled ‘Shunipun’
garments in Satkhira and introduced
‘Kollyani’ low-cost sanitary napkin in
Kurigram this year. A video
documentary
on
these
two
enterprises was published.

30 I

Figure 23: SWAPNO Video documentaries

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

Webinar on resilience building and adaptability of graduation approach
SWAPNO’s Graduation model got national
level exposure through a Webinar on
“Resilience building and adaptability of
Graduation approach” organized by Social
Protection for Employment Community
(SPEC) and BRAC. Mr. Mohammad
Mukhlesur Rahman Sarker, Director of
Central Medicine Service Department
(CMSD) and former National Project Director
of SWAPNO attended as one of the speakers.
The webinar was widely broadcasted
through social media platform.
Figure 24: Webinar on Graduation approach

TV talk show
For the ﬁrst time, SWAPNO’s success appeared in a Talk
Show. DBC News channel organized a Talk show consisting of
three episodes. These are –
• Episode 01: Role of Social Safety Net in ensuring
socio-economic development of women
• Episode 02: Role of women in RMG and Leather
sectors
• Episode 03: Empowering rural women – role of
SWAPNO
Distinguished guests both from public and private sectors
discussed about the journey of SWAPNO and how it
transformed the lives of marginalized women in Bangladesh.
They discussed that SWAPNO has critically assessed the
challenges that rural women are facing and implemented
innovative approaches that helped rural women to regain
their identity

Figure 25: SWAPNO in electronic media.
Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 31

BCC materials
To raise awareness about Nutrition, Menstrual hygiene and Violence against Women among the project
beneﬁciaries, the project has developed several communication materials like Nutrition Handbook, ﬂyer,
Hotline sticker, etc. These are widely distributed to not only the beneﬁciaries but also to local
administration and community people.

Beneﬁciary
Storybook
The project developed a
storybook titled
‘Weaving Dreams’
consisting short success
stories of SWAPNO
beneﬁciaries. This
storybook is available in
project website:
www.swapno-bd.org

Figure 26: IEC Materials

32 I

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

2.14 Project stakeholders’ meetings & visits
Meetings
The project conducted several
meetings
with
project
stakeholders – Government,
Donors and UNDP. Two Project
Implementation
Committee
(PIC) meetings and One Project
Steering
Committee
(PSC)
meeting were held through
online platform Zoom. The
meetings were chaired by the
National Project Director with
the participation of relevant
high-level GoB oﬃcials and
district colleagues, project staﬀ.
UNDP Bangladesh and SWAPNO
project conducted a “Zoom
meeting”
with
Local
Government
and
Rural
Development (LGRD) Minister
Md. Tazul Islam to discuss the
future work plan of the project.
UNDP Resident Representative

Figure 27: Stakeholder meeting

(RR) Mr. Sudipto Mukerjee,
Former
Assistant
Resident
Representative (ARR) Ashekur
Rahman and National Project
Manager (NPM) of SWAPNO
project attended the meeting
alongside the project personnel.
The Honourable Minister was
satisﬁed
on
the
project

intervention and intended
results achieved so far by
SWAPNO. The project also
conducted meetings with the
representatives
of
project
donors – Swedish Embassy in
Dhaka and Marico regarding the
project progress.

Visits
Several visits were made with the
representatives of UNDP Bangladesh,
Donor agencies and GoB in this year.
Swedish
Minister
of
International
Cooperation Mr. Per Olsson-Fridh visited
Satkhira to witness the sustainable
progression of SWAPNO women. Van
Nguyen,
the
Deputy
Resident
Representative (DRR), UNDP also visited
Satkhira to observe the progress of
Shunipun
Garments.
Mr.
Marcus
Johannesson, Hon'ble First Secretary,
Private sector development, Swedish
Embassy in Dhaka paid a visit to observe
SWAPNO project's activities in Jamalpur. Mr.
Ilias Ahmed, Chief Financial Oﬃcer of
Marcio Bangladesh, visited Kurigram to
observe the activities of Kollyani Sanitary
Napkin factory.

Figure 28: Stakeholder Visit

Mr. Md. Habibur Rahman,
National Project Director,
SWAPNO and Joint Secretary
of
Local
Government
Division, Ministry of Local
Government,
Rural
Development
and
Co-operatives,
visited
Lalmonirhat and Jamalpur

Districts. He observed the
progress of ﬁeld level
activities, discussed with
women
beneﬁciaries,
community people and
District level GoB oﬃcials.
He was very satisﬁed to see
the results of project’s
activities

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 33

CHALLENGES
& LESSONS
LEARNED

3. CHALLENGES & LESSONS LEARNED
Challenges & remedial actions
1. Delay in formal sector training - Formal sector training of

2021 was the 2nd
consecutive year that
faced the ongoing
COVID-19 challenges.
SWAPNO could
overcome the hurdles
building on an
effective partnership
of the Government,
UNDP and donor
agencies. While
addressing the
challenges, the
project learned some
lessons that helped in
the smooth
implementation of the
activities.

the project beneﬁciaries was supposed to be held in 2020. Due
to countrywide lockdown and restrictions on mass gathering,
the training started in April 2021 in the RMG sector and in May
2021 in the Leather Sector. Despite delays, the project
successfully pulled oﬀ the training in 2021 following all safety
measures.

2. Digital fraudulence - As mentioned earlier, SWAPNO's

cash-for-work Public Works Program allows its participants to
deposit a percentage of their wages in a mobile wallet, which
they receive after the project is completed. However, 16
beneﬁciaries from Jamalpur learned that their MFS accounts
were hacked and they lost their savings of BDT 2,86,500. The
project acted immediately and contacted the Bangladesh
Counter-Terrorism and Cyber Crime Unit to handle the case. Six
suspects were initially arrested, and the High Court instructed
to deny their bail application. Finally, another group of seven
criminals was apprehended, and the Cyber Crime team
recovered the lost amount.

Lessons learned
1. Eﬀective coordination among Local Government Institutions,
Upazila, and District level Government Oﬃcials and NGOs help
to accelerate the SWAPNO’s performance during the COVID-19
pandemic.
2. Though the pandemic created barriers in ensuring eﬀective
implementation, it has opened new opportunities for use of
digital platforms such as the use of digitalized tools like Zoom
meetings, WhatsApp, etc. These tools saved time, ensured
better monitoring, remote implementation, and reduced
exposure to COVID-19 risks.
3. At the end of 2020, the project established Shunipun
mini-garments in Satkhira which experienced signiﬁcant success
amidst the pandemic. This initiative encouraged the project to
commence several initiatives like establishing Milk chilling plant,
Water Treatment plant, Online Qurbani Haat, etc.

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 37

Annex

i) Success story

Fruits of Labour:
SWAPNO through
my eyes
By Van Nguyen,
Deputy Resident
Representative,
UNDP Bangladesh

I met a lovely woman called
Khaleda Khatun during my recent
work trip to Jamalpur. She’s from
the disaster-prone area of
Charbari Pakuria union in
Melanda Upazila. Life isn’t kind to
the people of Charbari, as
sourcing daily essentials remains
a
struggle
for
the
poverty-stricken villagers.
The warm and welcoming
42-year-old Khaleda told me her
story -- her parents also couldn’t
escape poverty, and they
struggled to provide for a family
of eight. Growing up in such
hardship meant she had to start
working at a young age and never
got the chance to go to school.
Like countless other girls of the
region, Khaleda was married oﬀ
at a very young age -- she was
only 12. Soon afterwards, she
became the mother of two

38 I

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

daughters and a son. She was
passing her days with the family
as best as they could, but then
her husband died due to illness
and lack of proper treatment.
Khaleda recalled, “I was in
complete distress after my
husband died. I had no savings to
run my family. And my husband
had debts which I had no means
to pay back.”
Unlike many others who would
rely on fate, Khaleda chose not to
give up. Despite the many
problems she had to face, she
was determined to rebuild her
life with perseverance and hard
work. She left for Dhaka and got a
job at a garments factory, but
soon she had to marry her
daughters oﬀ when they were
just 11 and 12. To add to her
woes, Khaleda was diagnosed
with breast cancer.

She had to spend all her income
and savings behind the
treatment. “I lost my job and
returned home. But my streak of
unfortunate events didn’t end
there,” Khaleda continued, “One
of my daughters’ husband fell
sick, lost his job, and the two of
them nowhere else to go. So
they began living with me.”
Khaleda was scouring for better
opportunities when she chanced
upon SWAPNO’s recruitment
notices. She learned about the
immense support that SWAPNO
provides to women who are
battling poverty and other
hardships in her area. She
promptly applied and was
selected for a 15-month work
cycle.
Now, Khaleda joins fellow
women in road maintenance
work from 8am to 2pm every
day. The job pays Tk 200 a day, of
which Tk 50 goes into her savings
fund. She will be able to make
use of these savings after
completing
the
SWAPNO
graduation. In addition, Khaleda
is also receiving training on
health,
nutrition,
ﬁnancial
literacy, gender-based violence,
disaster risk reduction and other
relevant issues to better

contribute to her community.
“The training has been quite
useful, actually. I picked up
vegetable gardening from there.
Bought two goats and ﬁve
chickens with my income from
the project. I am also taking
orders for nakshi katha and
earning
s o m e

“SWAPNO has
not only helped me
earn more but also gave
me the confidence to
build a better future for
my children and
myself.”
money on
t h e
side from these ventures,” said a
smiling Khaleda, ﬁnally done
recounting the stories of her
hardship in the past.
She sells chicken eggs in the
market, and her goat-rearing has
been quite successful -- they’re
worth around Tk 30000 now. She
earned around Tk 2400 by
embroidering on quilts and
turning them into nakshi katha.

“I’m planning to sell the goats in
the near future and combine
that earning with some savings.
Then I’ll be able to buy a cow and
diversify my income activities
even further,” said Khaleda,
already a smart businessperson.
“Just within ten months of
working with SWAPNO, I’ve been
able to achieve more of my
dreams than I thought would be
possible. I feel like a completely
new person with a new vision
now,” she said, “SWAPNO has
not only helped me earn
more but also gave me the
conﬁdence to build a better
future for my children and
myself.”
I left Jamalpur and carried with
me Khaleda’s big smile. SWAPNO
(Strengthening Women’s Ability
for
Productive
New
Opportunities) is a social
transfer-based graduation model
project targeting ultra-poor rural
women who are widows,
divorced, abandoned or left with
a disabled husband.
Major
interventions of the project
include ﬁxed wage contract for
under public works component;
need-based life skills and
livelihoods training and formal
ﬁnancial inclusion.

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

I 39

ii) Financial cost statement
Project Aid through UNDP
Output

Budget (USD)

Expenditure as of
31 Dec’2021

Output 1: Core beneﬁciary households are able to protect their
food security and livelihoods post-project

954,413

761,697

Output 2: Core beneﬁciaries and their dependents have
improved their human capital in terms of nutrition, health,
education and voice

103,140

76,830

Output 3: Beneﬁciary household have access to public services
essential for their livelihood activities and family wellbeing.

45,684

32,468

Output 4: Public assets promoting local economic regeneration,
improving social conditions and enhancing environmental
conditions are maintained and developed for the benefit of the
poor of the participating rural communities

94,500

78,816

Output 5: Local communities have better capacity to withstand
natural disasters and recover after disasters.

157,788

221,302

Output 6: Local government has capacity to implement social
transfer projects with accountability, transparency, gender
sensitivity and pro-poor approach

296,567

135,428

Output 7: Human Resources and Administration

347,430

383,884

1,999,522

1,690,425

TOTAL

Due to Covid-19 pandemic situation, some programme were deferred to be implemented in 2022.
Therefore, overall delivery for 2021 was 85%.
Government fund through LGD

Description
Opening balance in 2021
Fund Released
Available fund for 2021
Expenditure for beneﬁciary wage payment
Unspent balance refunded (as on 30th June’2021)
Balance Forwarded (as on 31st Dec’2021)

40 I

BDT
93,675
123,195,000
123,288,675
123,286,492
2,183
-

Strengthening Women’s Ability For Productive New Opportunities (SWAPNO)

USD
1,106
1,456,199
1,457,305
1,457,280
25
-

ANNUAL
REPORT
2021
STRENGTHENING WOMEN’S ABILITY FOR
PRODUCTIVE NEW OPPORTUNITIES (SWAPNO)
Project Oﬃce
Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE) Bhaban
8th Floor, Kakrail, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh
website: www.swapno-bd.org

