Apply
Our dedicated team guides families through the MUIDS admissions process. They strive to ensure all families feel welcomed, understood, and valued. You can reach them Monday through Friday during normal business hours through their email muidsadmission@mahidol.edu or their phone number 66-(0)2-408-8555. They can answer all of your questions and are here to help all families make a smooth transition into the MUIDS community.
Apply now at https://muidsadmission.mahidol.ac.th/

 Schedule
Application Date for Academic Year of 2024-2025  Apply Now
Cycle 1Application date:August 3rd to September 17th 2023Testing date:September 23th & 24th 2023
Cycle 2Application date:October 16th to November 26th 2023Testing date:December 2nd & 3rd 2023
Cycle 3Application date:January 9th to March 10th 2024Testing date:March 23th & 24th 2024
Admission announcement TH Admission announcement EN For
Applicants' Qualifications 
Applicants who are studying in a school or institution in Thailand

Currently studying in Mathayom Suksa 3 or have finished Mathayom Suksa 3 (Thai education system) or
Currently studying in Grade 9 or have finished Grade 9 (American education system) or
Currently studying in Year 10 or have finished Year 10 (UK education system)

Applicants who are studying in a school or institution overseas

Currently studying in Grade 9 or have completed Grade 9 studies (according to the American education system) or
Currently studying in Year 10 or have completed Year 10 studies (according to the British education system) or
Currently studying or have completed studies that are equivalent to Mathayom Suksa 3 of the Thai education system, according to any other education system

Remark:

Applicants must be physically healthy, without any diseases or conditions that might inhibit their ability to study. Applicants must be willing to follow the school's current regulations, or any future changes.
The school does not allow applicants who do not meet the eligibility criteria to take the entrance exam in all circumstances.
 Documents
Application Process and Required Documents 
All applicants must fill out an online application form, available on the website https://muidsadmission.mahidol.ac.th If the applicant provides any false or misleading information in the online application system, the school will terminate the application immediately, and the applicant will no longer be eligible for examinations. Documents required for application are as follows:

Applicants who are studying in a school or institution in Thailand

A file of the applicant's photo (Front view, in school uniform / formal attire) which should be taken not more than 6 months prior to the application.
A photocopy of the applicant's identification card
A photocopy of the applicant's house registration (the first page of the house registration and the page containing the applicant's name)
A photocopy of the applicant's report card or
Mathayom Suksa 1 - 2 report card or transcript (Thai education system) or
Grade 7 - 8 report card or transcript (American education system) or
Year 8 - 9 report card or transcript (UK education system)
A photocopy of the certificate of student status as a student who is currently in Mathayom Suksa 3 / Grade 9 / Year 10 from the applicant's current school (the certificate should be no more than 120 days old)
If the applicant has already finished middle school (Mathayom Suksa 3), the certificate of education status (ปพ.2) and transcript (ปพ.1) could be used for application.

Applicants who are studying in a school or institution overseas

A file of the applicant's photo (Front view, in school uniform / formal attire) which should be taken not more than 6 months prior to the application.
A photocopy of the applicant's identification card or passport (for overseas applicants only).
A photocopy of the applicant's house registration (the first page of the house registration and the page containing the applicant's name).
A photocopy of the applicant's academic transcript
Grade 7 - 8 academic transcript (American education system) or
Year 8 - 9 academic transcript (British education system) or
An academic transcript of any other education system, which is equivalent to Mathayom Suksa 1 - 2 of the Thai education system
A certificate of student status for Grade 9 / Year 10 / Any other education system that is equivalent to Mathayom Suksa 3 of the Thai education system (the certificate must not be more than 120 days old)
A photocopy of the course syllabus for credit transfer consideration (if necessary).

Remark:

Application documents must be in Thai or English only.
Applicants who are currently studying overseas must be approved by the credit transfer committee of the school for their eligibility of taking the entrance exam, and will be considered based on their application documents. Applicants will be notified of their credit transfer results within 1 - 7 working days after completely submitting all application documents.
 Test
Admission Exams 
The applicant must take all the examinations on the specified date and time that the school has provided. The score test from other institutions is not allowed to submit for consideration. If the applicant is not able to take all the examinations in the specified period, the exam will be incomplete and not accepted status.

Saturday	Sunday
2.30 hours	TOEFL ITP	1 hour	MAP test (Math & Reading)
1.30 hours	Essay Writing	15 minutes	Interview Admission Team
Question 

Ms. Nutchaya Singin
Head of Admissions
 
Ms. Usa Pholkit
Admissions Officer
 
Ms. Rapatchanok Onnuam
Admissions Officer
Contact: muidsadmission@mahidol.edu
Privacy Sitemap Contact Us   
Mahidol University International Demonstration School
 999 Phuttamonthon Sai 4 Road
Salaya, Phuttamonthon,
Nakhon Pathom 73170, Thailand
 +66 (0) 2-408-8555
 muidspr@mahidol.ac.th
 2018 MUIDS All Rights Reserved.
   


